Abstract

The international news is headlined on a near daily basis with stories of the unprecedented flood of migrants from the Middle East seeking asylum. Their most frequent destinations are member countries of the European Union; so frequent in fact that the “European migrant crisis” has its own Wikipedia page. For this analysis, data was extracted from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Population Statistics Reference Database on monthly asylum applicants from January 1999 through October 2015. The data lists the number of asylum applicants on a monthly basis by country of origin and country of asylum. Based on this database, various time-series models were constructed to forecast the number of asylum applicants from Syria to Germany for November 2015 through March 2016. The most accurate model indicates that the current number of asylum applicants depends on the shocks to the system for the prior two months, as well as the shocks from one year prior, with the greatest impact coming from the one month prior. Forecasting using this model indicates a slight decline in the number of asylum applicants from October to November, followed by an upward trend for December through March. This slight decline is in keeping with the seasonal behavior exhibited in previous years where the number of applicants decreases in the winter followed by an increase throughout the rest of the year. The accuracy of the model may be impacted by the small dataset size compared to the relative complexity of the model. Additional observations may increase the accuracy of the model or suggest additional parameters for inclusion. It is also important to note that since the model only includes applicants to a single country, it is highly susceptible to changes in legislation from Germany or other EU member states regarding the acceptance of asylum applications. Significant changes in legislation would invalidate the stationarity condition necessary for accurate modeling and forecasting.
